Now, let's take a look at the Tree SHAP algorithm.
So to get a sense of the SHAP library that we'll be using later,
let's implement a simple version of the Tree SHAP algorithm.
This is based on Scott Lumber's paper,
Consistent Individualized Feature Attribution for Tree Ensembles.
So that's a link to the paper here.
Training and reusing a single tree model.
You may notice that calculating SHAP values for every feature and
for every individual data point is very computationally expensive.
For example, we would be training
multiple models just to calculate the importance of one feature,
which is what we did in the previous exercise.
With decision trees, we can actually train a decision tree on all the features and then
we use that single tree to calculate Shapley values using subsets of that single tree.
So here's just a visual of what we were doing
before where we would create a new instance of a tree model,
train it on features one and two,
create a separate instance of a tree model,
train it just on feature two.
So, we're going to look at a more efficient way of doing this.
For some intuition, let's look at a model that has just two features.
The tree splits on feature one first and then on feature two.
If we wanted to see how a model would perform if it only used the first feature,
we would look at the subtree that consists of the top three nodes of this tree.
So that's these three blue nodes right here.
Similarly, if we wanted to see how a model would make
predictions if it used only feature two,
we could look at the subtree containing the bottom three nodes,
starting at the node that splits on feature two.
So that's these three nodes right here.
Another example with three features.
Now, let's look at a tree that has trained on three features.
Let's say it's splits on feature one,
then feature two, and then on feature three.
So how do we simulate the prediction of a tree that
was only trained on features one and three,
but not on feature two?
So in other words, only feature one and feature three.
Well, if we didn't split on feature two,
that means that we would include the training samples in both
the left and right subtree of that node when making a prediction.
This is how we can simulate that the tree never split on feature two.
So in other words, we'll see in the algorithm,
how do we combine so that we pretend that we actually didn't split on feature two,
even though we trained this tree on all the features including feature two?
Let's also think about how we handle the predictions when we split on the feature.
If we split on feature three,
down here and that particular data point we're making a prediction for,
so that's our sample input.
If that ends up in the left child node in green here then we
can use the prediction based on training samples in this left subtree,
and ignore the training samples in the right subtree.
So this is some intuition about what
the algorithm will be doing when we look at the actual algorithm.
So we're going to walk through the algorithm in the next video,
but feel free to look over this part of the notebook before continuing on.